Race and the wealth gap
If there’s one thing I’ d want people to understand
about the asset gap, the wealth gap in America,
is that this was a gap that was created
by public decisions for the most part,
by public institutions that gave
different opportunities for different people
to create, nurture, and gain assets.
There's a long history in America
of explicit government policy
to exclude African Americans from
a piece of the pie, from wealth accumulation.
It goes back to slavery,
where, by law, slaves, of course, didn't own their own bodies,
let alone other assets.
Even after the Civil War,
there were policies like the Black Codes in the South,
which required enormous licensing fees
for blacks to start a business,
but nothing for whites.
The difference between wealth and income
is really highlighted when you look at
differences among blacks and whites.
While blacks have ten cents
for every dollar of wealth that whites have,
they have sixty-two cents
in terms of every dollar of income.
So the gap for wealth
is much greater than the gap for income.
So if wealth is important
for securing life chances,
then blacks have a very difficult time
doing that compared to whites.
In the post Civil Rights era it's very difficult to
talk about race and class
as two separate entities,
because they overlap so much in our society.
Many things that we associate
with race on the surface of it,
like differences in savings rates
or differences in education and performance,
are really class differences
when you get the data and compare
individuals coming from
similar economic circumstances.
But the complicating factor is that those very
economic circumstances are determined by race,
through historical inequalities,
through contemporary dynamics
where whites get jobs
disproportionately more than blacks do
and other minority groups.
So race matters,
but it often matters indirectly
through the class position,
the economic situation of a family.